Hello everyone, welcome back to Exploring
Quantum Physics, I'm Charles Clark.
In this final part of the lecture, we're
going to look at,
the systematics of solving the
Schroedinger
equation for systems with angular
momentum.
Now early on, we had some fun sort of just
making
functions up And seeing that they had
desirable properties.
now in this section we're going to look at
more systematic approaches, both
analytical, and numerical, that one would
use to develop in a rigorous way.
Or at least a systematically improvable
way.
A solution to a shortage equation.
So we learned that
when we have a spherical potential,
potential that's a function of the
radius only then one can choose
Eigenfunctions that are Eigenfunctions of
momentum, and then in fact the
the functions that encode angular momentum
and
the angles of the system are universal.
That is they have, they can always be, the
same
functions can always be applied, though
there's flexibility in choosing them,
that may be advantageous when you're
dealing with problems that have
a, a particular outcome in terms of
interaction with external fields.
So now just expanding if we take take
the view that the wave function will be an
eigenfunction of
angular momentum, then the Schrodinger
equation can be rendered in this form.
It's separable in radial and angular
variables.
And it's convenient it usually convenient
to go to some dimensionless
form, because then as we alluded to in
earlier lectures, you
have a good chance of being able to map
the equation
that you have, into some standard special
function of mathematical physics.
It's been very well studied.
those analytic properties are understood.
where there's a good understanding of this
asymptotic behavior, and things of that
type.
Things that you don't want to have to do
for yourself.
So this just, these, these are just, sort
of standard approaches to reducing
the wave function and the, and the
potentials in the N V energies
to some dimensionalist set of variables.
Now let's
have a little exercise in how that works
in practice.
Okay, so with that scaling accomplished we
have,
we attained a simplified form of equation
here.
And I guess it's, it's quite obvious that
near row equals zero.
this equation becomes problematic.
There, there's a singularity here.
And well, it doesn't exist for l equals
zero.
But it's there's something there's
another,
another term that's still present there.
And so the the singular points
of equations of this type.
Are where psi
and d psi d rho
cannot be specified
independently.
This is, this is in contrast to the
usual case of a linear differential
equation, where you
always are able to choose the, the
function
of the derivative without any necessary
constraint between them.
but that applies only if the underlying,
if the potential is non-singular.
So the angles operate itself introduces a
singularity in the potential.
Nevertheless, although one cannot specify
the
function of it's derivitive independently,
there still always exists two solutions.
for second order differential equations.
And near the singular point the following,
the following behavior is generic.
So this is, here's an, here's an example
from a it's from a two dimensional wave
equation for the Bessel function.
But it has, it, its properties are similar
to those in three or, more than two
dimensions.
And that is the sing, here's the singular
point, r equals 0.
And let's, so this J zero and Y zero are
two solutions for
what you might call the r equals 0
solution, two
dimensions.
And so you can see that one of them is
regular at the origin.
And then the other solution is has a, has
a lo-, in this case a logarithm of
divergence.
So I guess the the point to be made is
that if
you, if you have a wa-, a function that
satisfies this equation.
Equation, and you choo, you choose a
particular value,
you choose a particular value
away from the origin.
And then you, you assign a value of the
function and the slope,
a slope at that point.
Then there's a, there's a unique function.
That is of a unique solution that's
regular at the origin.
But the generic behavior is that you'll,
you'll
pick up a component of the divergence
solution.
this is just another case for.
The, these are the oscillating vessel
functions.
And these are the ones that have
exponential.
divergence and convergence and you see the
same, the same properties
associated with the singular point.
In other words, at the singular point,
there's typically a unique solution of the
equation that is regular, and then there's
an infinite number of solutions that are
irregular.
Which you know, could just be arbitrary
linear combinations of JA, AJ not, plus B
Y not, is the generate solution but unless
B is equal to zero, it will diverge.
Okay, so for Schrodinger equations in
three dimensions, provided the
potential here.
Is provide U is weaker
than r to the minus two as r goes to zero.
these terms dominate, and so.
The behavior of the solutions near the
origin
is, is in the, the leading order behavior
is independent of you, it's universal,
it's determined
by this very strong repulsive angular
momentum barrier.
And so
the two possible solutions in this case,
are of the form, so
phi of rho just goes to some constant as
rho goes to 0.
And the leading coefficient, the leading
term, is plus L for
the regular solution, or minus L plus 1
for the irregular solution.
Now, you never use the irregular solution
near the origin, but if you're,
you're piecing together different parts of
a problem as you move
away from the origin, you to another,
another type of effective potential.
you, you'll net the, the irreg, the
solution that's
irregular at the origin becomes important
in describing physical processes.
For example, the scattering theory.
great use is made of the solution that's
irregular at the origin
which is employed in, in regions that are
far from the origin
and gives rise to the phase shift that
characterizes this scattering processes.
then there's also the issue of behavior of
large distances, and again there's a,
there's a similar,
fact at hand there.
Typically, especially
when the, the potential grows indefinitely
like for the harmonic
oscillator or the bouncing ball every, the
generic
solution diverges in that region, and
there's only a few special
cases that, that converge.
And are acceptable as physical solutions.
So here's a particular case of now that
I've mentioned
one I like a lot, I like this example a
lot.
The area function.
you've worked an example from this, and
again here you see there's a, basically,
at the turning point of the classical
motion, you know these, this pair, Ai and
Bi together, a linear
combination provides the most general
solution that's possible,
to the Schrodinger equation in, in the
linear potential.
but unless the coefficient of Bi vanishes,
you get a solution that diverges
in the, so called, forbidden region beyond
the turning point of classical motion.
Now we're going to solve the hydrogen atom
proper.
Outline the solution
as it's done in the ordinary way.
Which is to or the conventional way in
textbooks, which is to solve, directly
solve the Schrodinger equation in terms of
a, analytical approach.
and this is important for a variety of
reasons.
First it's a good example that has a
lot of, counterparts of treating the
harmonic oscillator.
Are, or variations
on it in systems where you don't have a
high degree
of symmetry that the hydrogen atom has,
and it shows you how
you incorporate the knowledge of the
singularity the singular points of
the of the equation motion at the origin,
and at large distances.
And then, in practical matters for certain
types of calculations where you want to.
ca-, calculate collisions,
photoionization, cross-section,
and the like.
by the far the most convenient way of
doing that.
In some cases, the only practical way I
think, is to have access to the wave
functions.
So that you can take the appropriate
matrix elements.
Right.
In any event here is The hydrogen atom in
simple form, potential is inversely
proportional to the radius.
we use scale
variables, and we get a, a reduced
dimensionless equation of this form.
Now in the hydrogen atom, like in the
solar system, as, as we look, discussed in
the early lectures on the Bohr model,
there
are two domains, energy positive and
energy negative.
For positive energies, the electron
escapes
from the nucleus, moves indefinitely far
away.
For negative energies, it's bound.
So let's we're going to deal with the
bound states in this treatment.
In that case, the energies are negative
and
so in the, in this equation.
it is evident,
I think, that, as as rho goes to infinity,
then, then this term becomes negligible to
that, as, as, as do the
others.
The the rho, the dependence upon rho
terms that depend upon rho can be
neglected.
And so that, that means that sorry, the
second, the second derivative is still
still effectual.
it means that large rho, there's a,
there's a exponentially decaying envelope.
And when you take that into account, quite
remarkably.
let, let's see how this works now.
you get you by this substitution, you get
this formula.
Then, quite remarkably, this this is
really in some sense a
if you think about the powers of, of,
Taylor series.
This has a one over row, this is a
constant, this is
a one over row squared, and that's a one
over row squared.
So we have a
row to the minus two, row to the minus
one.
And row to the zero, type of coefficients
in this equation.
But in this form, we now just have a row
to the minus two.
From these two, and then a row to the
minus one from these two.
So this means that we if we, if we use a
power series,
This type of transformation leads us to a
two-term recurrence relation.
Which is solvable.
Because if you have a two-term recurrence
relation you can just, you can just start
at the singular part of the origin and
then, choose
an arbitrary value and just advance the
wave function indefinitely.
You don't if you have a three term
recurrence relation, it's, you have to
satisfy a, what amounts to a non-trivial
boundary condition.
Furthermore, in the hydrogen atom, as well
in the harmonic oscillator,
and a number of other cases where you have
highly
sort of bound states.
The
the series has to terminate at some, at
some value of the
order in the series.
If it continues on indefinitely, it'll
tend to diverge.
So this again is sort of a generic case
that you find that from the, the two term.
Relation.
It implies vanishing
of higher members at Eigen
values.
And those are, those are relatively easy
to see.
Now you see the same, the same sort of
behavior
in numerical work and
I've, I've written composed a spreadsheet
that allows you to see
numerical integration of the shortage
equation sort of before your eyes.
And there's a small instruction manual.
It's fairly easy to use, and I think the.
If you are, if you're interested in
practical solution of
the Schrödinger Equation for arbitrary
potentials, getting some experience with
numerical techniques is invaluable,
because it shows you that the,
that the the, the generic existence of
this divergent behavior.
When you're trying to, when you're trying
to
find a solution that, that converges at
large distance.
Cause in, in numerical work, if you
continue onwards, eventually you'll see a
divergence.
So there's a a bit of an art associated
with numerical
work and finding solutions for which
there's no known analytic form.
So, I'm, I'm going to leave off with
lecturing.
I encourage you to To try your hand at
numerical integration.
And I think the the homework problem set
for this week, is a
little bit more challenging than usual.
hope you enjoy it anyway.
And like to see you back again in our last
week.